Welcome to J.W. Broadcasting. This month we'll discuss something that's easy to talk about but difficult to do, making wise decisions.
We'll hear what wise choices Greg and Jordan Harris made as they raised their children.
We'll also catch up with Enrique Torres, a man who made great changes in his life.
And we'll learn what helped him to stick to those changes.
And the latest episode of Iron Sharp and Zion will show us how to be adaptable in our ministry.
This is J.W. Broadcasting for April 2023.
The theme of this month's program is, make wise decisions.
Now, discussion is based on Job 34 verse 11. Let's read that together.
For he, Jehovah, will reward a man according to what he does and bring upon him the consequences of his ways.
As highlighted in the scripture, our actions are very important and our actions are usually the result of decisions we make.
Some decisions are made after a lot of serious thought. Others though are made very quickly.
But no matter how much thought goes into making a decision, we need to recognize this basic fact.
Wise decisions bring positive rewards and wrong decisions can result in very negative consequences.
Of course, all of us want to make wise decisions, but what are wise decisions?
Wise decisions are those that please our Heavenly Father, Jehovah.
Most of us have already made some very good decisions. These include the big decisions in life such as dedicating ourselves to Jehovah and getting baptized.
And deciding not to become involved in the religious and political disputes of this world.
No doubt before we made those major decisions, we spend a lot of time praying about them and seeking Jehovah's direction.
And we have seen his blessing in our lives because of these right decisions.
In this program though, we won't be discussing such major decisions.
Rather, we'll focus on decisions that may be viewed by some as minor.
However, some of these can lead to very serious consequences.
First we'll consider a Bible example of a person who served Jehovah and yet made some wrong decisions along the way.
We'll analyze what caused this faithful servant to make these wrong decisions.
Then we'll consider what we need to do in order to make wise decisions.
Finally, we'll consider what we need to do if we realize we've already made an unwise decision.
So to start, let's discuss a faithful servant of Jehovah who made some unwise decisions.
The example we have in mind is that of King Jehosephat.
What was Jehovah's view of King Jehosephat?
Let's see the answer at 2 Chronicles 17 and verses 3 and 4.
Jehovah continued with Jehosephat because he walked in the former ways of his forefather David and did not search for the bails.
But he searched for the God of his father and followed his commandment and not the practices of Israel.
That sounds like a wonderful commendation, doesn't it?
Yes, Jehosephat was a faithful King.
He made the wise decision to worship Jehovah.
But even so, he still made some very unwise decisions.
Let's read about one of those unwise decisions at 2 Chronicles chapter 18 and verse 1.
Jehosephat had riches and glory and abundance.
But he made a marriage alliance with Ahab.
Yes, he made his son marry Ahab's daughter, Atholah.
Now that was a very unwise decision.
Why? Because Ahab had built a temple for bale and had even employed 850 false prophets.
Ahab was also married to wicked Queen Jezebel.
Who would want the child to marry into such a bad family?
What was Jehosephat thinking?
Why did he arrange for this marriage?
Perhaps he wanted to reunite the 12 tribes or he may have had some political and commercial motives for wanting to have Ahab as an ally.
Even though we don't know for sure the reason, we do know there were consequences.
Because of this close relationship with Ahab, Jehosephat felt obligated to support Ahab in a war against the Sunians.
However, this led to yet another unwise decision.
As they were preparing for this battle, Jehosephat asked for direction from one of Jehovah's prophets.
Ahab though expressed his hatred for the prophet and after hearing the prophet's message had him thrown into prison.
At that point, it was decision time for Jehosephat.
What did he decide to do?
Although he initially disagreed with Ahab, he eventually joined him in the battle.
Jehosephat disregarded the warning from Jehovah.
But then this led him to still another unwise decision, this time an incredibly foolish decision.
What happened?
Jehovah's prophet had foretold that the Israelites would lose their shepherd or king in battle.
So Ahab said that he would disguise himself and not enter the battle dressed as a king.
He then said that Jehosephat should still dress like a king.
Now just think about that for a moment.
Ahab was basically saying,
you go out into the battle with a target on your back and all hide in disguise.
Really?
Jehosephat's decision to agree to do that was not only unwise but also foolish.
It nearly cost him his life.
So why would he do that?
Inside on the scripture says that perhaps Jehosephat didn't want to go back on his original promise to accompany Ahab.
So maybe he would have lost face if he backed out of the agreement at that point.
Although Jehosephat did survive the battle, Jehovah sent another prophet to him to say what's recorded at 2 Chronicles 19 verse 2.
Is it the wicked you should be helping and is it those who hate Jehovah you should love?
Because of this, the indignation of Jehovah is against you.
Although Jehovah acknowledged the good things that Jehosephat had accomplished in other aspects of his life,
Jehosephat clearly made some very unwise decisions.
What lessons do we learn from Jehosephat's wrong decisions?
Lesson 1. Just because we've done many good things in Jehosephat's service doesn't mean that we'll always make wise decisions.
Lesson 2. Making friendships with those who hate Jehosephat can put us under pressure to make other unwise decisions.
Lesson 3. Even though we may seek Jehosephat's direction,
we must follow it if we want to make wise decisions.
Lesson 4. If we realize that we've made an unwise decision, don't keep going in the same course. Stop and change direction.
These lessons can be summarized in the words of Proverbs 22 verse 3. There we told,
the shrewd one sees the danger and conceals himself,
but the inexperience keeps right on going and suffer the consequences.
Yes, we need to see the possible consequences of wrong decisions and then take action to avoid them.
What were some of the consequences of Jehosephat's unwise decisions?
It nearly cost him his life. His oldest son died in apostate,
and later his daughter-in-law, Atholaya, killed all the heirs to the throne, except one baby, and set herself up as queen of Judah.
But you might be thinking, still Jehosephat viewed Jehosephat as a good king. Yes, he did.
And it's encouraging for us to know that even if we have made some unwise decisions,
it's possible that Jehovah may still view us as his faithful servants.
Does that mean, then, that our decisions are not so important?
The Watchtower back in 1980 made this interesting comparison.
It used an illustration of two ship captains.
One skillfully maneuvered his ship through a storm, bringing the vessel and his crew safely to shore,
but the other captain made unwise decisions.
And because of that, he experienced shipwreck during the same storm, saving only his life.
While both captains escaped with their lives, the one whose ship remained intact would certainly enjoy greater happiness and honour, wouldn't he?
It's obvious which captain Jehosephat was like.
Unlike Jehosephat, surely we'd prefer to be like the successful captain, the one whose ship remained intact.
How can we make sure that we are like the successful captain?
Back in 2011, the April Watchtower had a special chart entitled Steps to Making Good Decisions.
It listed these steps in making wise decisions.
One, avoid being presumptuous.
Two, do research.
Three, pray for wisdom.
Four, make the decision.
Five, implement the decision.
But then there was an additional step.
Six, review and adjust.
Why is Step 6 listed?
Well, from time to time, we need to review decisions we've already made.
As we do so, perhaps we'll come to realise that some of them were not the best decisions.
Can you still be like the successful captain?
Yes, you can.
How?
If you courageously make the needed adjustments.
We must acknowledge that not all decisions work out exactly as we had planned.
As Ecclesiastes 9-11 reminds us, time and unexpected events overtake us all.
So what should we do if that's the case?
The same Watchtower in 2011 answers that question for us.
After saying that Jehovah expects us to live up to such decisions as our dedication and our marriage vows,
it went on to say,
most decisions, though, are less waiting.
A wise person will, from time to time, review the decisions he has made.
He will not let pride or stubbornness prevent him from adjusting or even reversing a decision.
His prime concern is to make sure that his life course continues to honor God.
Thinking back to the illustration of the two captains, at times they may need to reverse a former unwise decision.
That happened during a hurricane back in 1889.
The captain of the British ship Caliope was anchored in the harbor in Apia, Western Samoa, when a hurricane started blowing.
Initially, he decided like all the other captains in the harbor to weather the storm where he was.
But as the waves grew in height and the dangers increased, the captain realized he had made the wrong decision.
What did he do?
He courageously reversed his decision and headed out to open sea.
It was difficult, but ultimately he saved himself, his ship, and the 250 sailors on board.
This bold act of courage ended him into the annals of naval history.
To be like that courageous captain, at times we need to prayerfully reexamine our past decisions.
These could be decisions about our employment, entertainment, education, or even where we live.
When we made the original decisions, they may have seemed wise to us.
But do they still seem that way now?
If we see the dangerous winds of bad consequences and the frightening waves of disaster approaching,
because our decisions were not completely in harmony with Jehovah's will, what should we do?
Be like the wise captain.
Don't worry about losing face, be courageous, pray for Jehovah's help, and then take bold action.
Make the changes you need to make in order to continue to please Jehovah.
In this way, you'll make the wise decision.
The one that leads to success, the one that Jehovah will bless.
One thing that will help us make wise decisions is to remember the big picture, not just what happens today,
but how this will affect our future.
In other words, don't just think of now.
Think of forever.
That's the theme of our music video for this month.
In this world, it can be hard, not just to follow your heart, to be different, into what's right.
But Jehovah tells us in his word, don't be molded by this worldly promises life, in paradise.
You'll stand tall.
Give Jehovah's right there with you.
He won't let you fall.
And pray day to climb those mountains out there, standing in your way.
Hold only for the day before forever.
But we'll try and offer fame.
We'll do spotlight on your name.
Raise you up, we're all to see.
But rather than strive after wind, Jehovah says reach out to him, he promises life, in paradise.
So stand tall.
Give Jehovah's right there with you.
He won't let you fall.
And pray day to climb those mountains out there, standing in your way.
Hold only for the day.
So stand tall.
Give Jehovah's right there with you.
Those mountains out there, standing in your way.
No matter how long we've been serving Jehovah, or what changes we face in life, we can always keep our hope of living forever.
Reflecting on this hope can help us make wise decisions at any stage in life.
Earlier we discussed that at times, we need to review a decision we made previously.
In our next segment, a family decides to move to a foreign language field.
Does this prove to be a wise decision for them?
Let's see how things turn out.
Hey you, are you ready?
The Haitian community in our area was growing, and the new Haitian Creole congregation was formed nearby.
We checked out their territory and saw they needed a lot of help.
So, should we do this?
I've been praying for more studies. I think this might just be my answer.
Yeah, I'm in. Good. Then as soon as we get home, we can pray about it.
Our new language was exciting.
We spent every spare second we had trying to get better.
We had so much joy, but we had challenges too.
Could you read the next paragraph first, please?
Yeah, sorry where are we?
Our study was so nice today, wasn't it Nicholas?
It was. And yet again, I was totally lost.
We didn't realise that Nico just wasn't finding the same joy as us.
To help Nico, we did a few more things in our language.
Besides family worship, we attended one meeting a month with our old congregation.
Well, honestly, I'm a little worried about Nico.
He's having a tough time adapting to our new congregation.
Hmm, I get it.
You know, back when we first joined a foreign language congregation, everything was fun and new.
But after a little while, we noticed that our kids had lost their enthusiasm.
They were still hearing about Jehovah, but honestly, they weren't learning because it wasn't in their language.
Is that why you moved back?
It was, but at every family is different.
We each have to decide what's best for our own.
Thanks, that's true.
I found the perfect article to help us decide what to do.
It mentioned the example of Daniel.
He had to speak different languages every day.
But he made sure to study in Hebrew, his language.
The article mentioned Psalm 111.
In my heart, I treasure up your saying.
For Nico to treasure God's word in his heart, we felt he needed even more guidance in the language of his heart.
The truth is, when I'm at the meeting in my language, it's different.
I don't have to think a lot just to understand what I'm hearing.
Well, I think it's clear what's best for our family.
It is.
But what about your students?
It's okay, Nico. We'll find a way to help them.
The language we're immersed in every day is the language of your heart.
So it's best for you to keep growing spiritually in that same language.
It was the best decision in order for Nico to stay close to Jehovah.
But we did miss the Haitian Creole field.
So, a few years later.
Are you ready?
I'm a little nervous, but I think I'm ready.
We decided it was the right time to move back.
We're so glad our decision helped Nico build a solid foundation for his faith and his future.
How encouraging it was to be reminded that when we make a decision, we can always make adjustments later.
Have you ever made a decision that seemed wise at first?
But then over time, as things changed in your life, didn't seem so good.
Maybe you felt, I'll be a failure if I leave this assignment.
Remember, our primary concern must be to make sure that our life course continues to honor God.
Have the courage to consider making a change if your circumstances have changed.
Greg and Jordan Harris raised their children to love Jehovah.
What decisions did they make along the way?
When a person makes a sacrifice, they give up something for something that they consider is of higher value.
What kind of a price tag can you put on your child's love for Jehovah?
What kind of a price tag can you put on serving Jehovah whole soul as a family?
When I found out that we were going to have a family, it was overwhelming for me.
When you come into the truth, we weren't witnesses when I was a child.
Sometimes you're exposed to things that leave you with baggage, leave you unsure of yourself.
You need constant reassurance that you're going to be okay.
You can take care of any situation that comes along.
My dad, he gave me all I needed. He loved me so much.
I would take my mother's knitting yarn and tie it to his door handle after he went to sleep.
I would run it across the hall to my bedroom and tie it to my big toe so that when he opened his door in the morning I would wake up.
I could be with him that love that I had for my dad.
I wanted them to love Jehovah that much.
I wanted a string tight around their hearts right to Jehovah so that he was the one motivating them
and he was the one waking them up spiritually every day.
I loved to teach the children things and I would do it at any available moment.
And then of course at night as a family, usually on our bed we would read our Bible together.
It was the glue that kept us tied to Jehovah and kept us tied to each other.
Judges 7, Gideon said, watch me and do what I do.
So I knew that if we wanted the children to live the truth that we had to live it with them,
it couldn't be something that we just taught them.
We had to live our life of service to Jehovah with them.
Jesus said obviously we can't slave for two masters and I've tried to do that and believe me it does not work.
Like any father, I wanted to have a home for my family.
My profession was building houses but that cost me my pioneering.
And so I decided I had to quit building houses and so I did.
I started to do remodeled jobs and we looked for a place that we could afford that would sustain us in the full-time service.
And Jehovah provided exactly what we needed.
One of the highlights of raising the children was the annual visits to unassigned territory.
The success in the ministry was phenomenal so we decided as a family to take on the challenge of learning Spanish.
We had a large Spanish speaking population in our territory and in the surrounding territories and there was no group or congregation to help them.
When we would go out of the country to preach, we would often stay with family members of our Bible students or our brothers and sisters
in these countries and some very humble surroundings.
And we took advantage of the hospitality that they offered us because we wanted to live the culture with them.
It just opened our eyes to a world that we never knew existed.
Our family was able to progress and flourish spiritually because of a concentrated effort with Jordan and I.
She's been there to fill in all of the cracks.
He always made it so easy to love him, to love the children and to really focus on spiritual things.
When we prayed to Jehovah thinking about our family being able to serve him like this, we just say thank you.
We just try in some way to express how deeply we feel about this privilege that we have to be with Carson and Cherstie and Andrea Dimo.
We don't deserve any of these blessings from Jehovah but somehow he's blessed our efforts and he's given us an opportunity to smile and reflect on all of the things that he's done for us and what can we do to repage Jehovah but just keep going, keep trying and keep moving forward until we're on the other side.
Thank you brother and sister Harris for sharing your experience in such a heartfelt way.
You decided to put spiritual things first in your children's lives and gave them the chance to have a friendship with Jehovah.
What happens to us in childhood can shape who we become as adults for better or for worse.
If we don't like who we are now, we can change.
As we'll see in the latest installment of Where are they now?
Hello, who is it?
Hey, how are you?
Okay, come on up.
My name is Enrique Torres Jr.
I live in Staten Island in New York and I have the privilege to self in the Mid-Anon congregation.
First 40 years of my life, who are my life style, I was horrendous.
A judge stated that I had a propensity for criminality.
No doubt he was describing a vicious person.
As a youth, I was hanging around with the wrong kind of people that led me into a life of crime and debauchery.
This captain in our prison came up with a psychological plan to take the individuals that had the potential for leadership and put him in isolation.
I wind up via a mountain.
Can you imagine they were getting beat up?
It was becoming too much for me, the screams and so forth.
I said, this continuum, I'm not going to survive here.
I did get in contact with my father and he told me, never forget Jehovah.
That was his name and I saw, I got out of it.
I knew that there was nobody that could help me but God.
So that's when I found myself in prayer to Jehovah.
I vowed that I would make my business to learn more about him than just his name at that time. That's all I knew.
I got some literature, I got the Bible too.
Jehovah became all meaningful to me. That's when he became real to me.
That was the first 40 years of my life.
But the last 40 years of my life with Jehovah's training from his organization, my personality was transformed.
The blessings that I have received has been in the area of my field service and also my teaching ability, which has helped me to be able to draw closer to Jehovah.
I was privileged to become a ministerial servant for many years, field service over here for many more years.
One of the main challenges that I'm facing is that I have developed cancer and have gone through four cancer operations and also some chemotherapy.
Without relying upon Jehovah to help me to overcome these challenges, there's no doubt in my mind that I never would have been able to make it.
I would recommend to avoid that trap that I fell into hanging around with street gangs.
And then I'm getting involved in burglaries, robberies with some progression.
It was not all anything of value at all.
And instead what it brought me was a lot of grief, mental scars, and also a lot of trouble with my conscience.
I've studied God's word of the Bible so that you may be able to see what Jehovah has in store for the future.
And also you'll be able to see that he's a kind, merciful, loving God that doesn't want no one to be destroyed but wants them to have life.
Parents, never give up on your children. Jehovah never gave up on me.
And he rescued me from the spiritual darkness that I was in.
And he brought me into his light and to his wonderful organization.
And I give him all the credit for that. And when I speak to people, that's what I tell them.
I tell them it wasn't me. It's Jehovah that's done all of this. And it could do that for you too if you give him an opportunity.
Early in life, Enrique's poor choice of friends led him to make many other bad decisions.
But in his 40s, he decided to get to know Jehovah.
What a good reminder that we can continue to make changes later on in life.
And you parents, please keep in mind that the seeds of truth you planted in your children's hearts can move them to make good decisions later, even as adults.
Some of our decisions may seem small, yet they can have a powerful effect on our brotherhood.
In the next video, Brother Robert Lutcioni discusses how our response to someone can make peace or break it.
So our scripture text for today discusses the qualities needed to walk worthily and in a way that pleases Jehovah.
Now, you notice our scripture in scripture text Ephesians 4.1 is only a partial sentence.
Let's read the entire sentence, which takes in verses 1 through 3. Ephesians 4 verses 1 through 3.
He says, therefore, I, the prisoner in the Lord, appeal to you to walk worthily of the calling for which you recalled with all humility and mildness with patience, putting up with one another in love.
Earnestly endeavoring to maintain the oneness of the Spirit in the uniting bond of peace.
So here the Apostle Paul links walking worthily with unity, and you notice the qualities that are needed to do that.
He says that we need humility, mildness, and patience.
Now, this is not the only time that the Apostle Paul links these three qualities with being in unity.
We may remember Colossians chapter 3 and verse 12, and it tells us to clothe ourselves with humility, mildness, and patience.
Why? So that we can continue putting up with one another.
So why are these qualities so essential to peace and to unity? What would the scriptures say about them?
Well, perhaps we think of the scripture in Philippians chapter 2, verse 3 and 4, which says, do nothing out of contentiousness or egotism, but with humility, consider others superior to you.
See, that brings about peace and unity, or a proverb, chapter 15 and verse 1, a mild answer turns away rage, or proverb, chapter 25, 15, by patience, a commander is one over.
See, humility, mildness, patience.
These qualities are so vital for taking tension out of a situation and allowing for humility and for unity and peace.
Now, there's many accounts in the Bible that illustrate this fact, and we're going to consider just one, that of the Ephraimites and Gideon.
If you're looking at your Bibles in Judges chapter 6 and 7, it sets out the account of Gideon going against the Midianites.
We remember a response to Jehovah's direction, Gideon went against Midian, first with 32,000 men, and then finally weeded down to only 300 men.
Now, if you look in your Bibles, the study Bible map B6, it helps us to visualize the strategy that Gideon used with Jehovah's direction.
Now, the Midianites gather near the hill of Maurei, and you can see that here on the map.
And if you look at Judges chapter 6 and verse 34, we're reminded that Jehovah's Spirit came upon Gideon.
So here he's operating under Jehovah's Spirit. So what did he do? First off, he calls on the tribes of Manasseh, Asher, Zebulin, and Nathdalai to assist.
And that makes sense, because you can see where those tribes were in relation to where the fighting was going to be.
Then in Judges chapter 7, verse 22, Gideon's initial attack through the Midianites into confusion, and so the Midianites flee south toward Abel Miholla.
Verse 23 of chapter 7 says that he then calls on Nathdalai, Asher, and Manasseh to chase after them, and push them toward the south, further south.
And you can see the logic in that.
But then in an excellent strategy, in verse 24 and 25, to head them off, he also calls on Ephraim to capture the waters as far as Bethbara and Black Bear Escape.
And they do. And they're successful. The two main princes of Midian are killed. It's victory.
An excellent strategy, one of the greatest and most courageous and bravest battles in the Bible.
In fact, interestingly, there's no record ever again of the Midianites bothering Jehovah's people after this victory.
Can you imagine having a share in that project? How excited you would be? Well, not everybody was. Look at Judges chapter 8 and verse 1.
It says, then the men of Ephraim said to him, to Gideon, what have you done to us? Why did you not call us when you went to fight against Midian? And they quarreled bitterly with him?
What was Ephraim's problem? Well, they felt they should have been involved earlier, or perhaps the situation should have been handled different. Why weren't we involved? Why didn't you call us? We didn't know anything that was going on. Then we had to drop everything and come and bail you out.
Well, did Ephraim have humility, maleness, and patience? Well, far from it. And it was disrupting unity.
Now, how did Gideon respond? No, remember Gideon had Jehovah's spirit, and he had an excellent strategy that led to an outstanding victory for Jehovah. How did he respond? Well, look at verses 2 and 3.
It says, but he said to them, what have I done compared with you? Are not the gleanings of Ephraim better than the great harvest of Abysir? It was into your hand that God gave Midian's princes Orab and Zia. And what have I done compared with you? When he spoke this way, they calmed down.
You see Gideon showed humility, maleness, and patience. And the result, everyone calmed down and Gideon was able to get on with Jehovah's work at hand.
Now, we contrast that to the next time that the Ephraimites pulled the same trick as recorded in judges chapter 12. There, you remember they accused Jehovah of not calling them into battle, same story.
Well, you said, well, I did call you into battle and you didn't come. So I just did it myself. Next, you know, they're fighting among themselves completely distracted from carrying on Jehovah's work.
What's the lesson? Well, the lesson is is that things happen at times that makes peace go away. Sometimes brothers in the congregation at Bethel on a construction site may react like Ephraimites.
Sometimes we react like Ephraimites. But why didn't you ask my opinion? I was supposed to be involved in this. Why'd you call me last minute when you knew you needed this two weeks ago, and now I have to drop everything and help you out?
See, that happens that we're only human. Well, when it happens, how will we react? You say unity is more important than who was right and who is wrong and Gideon understood that simple truth.
And unity is so important today. It was interesting. A beautiful watchtower article 2014, December 15th, and the article was entitled facing the end of this old world together. And it stated this.
It said, one of the darkest periods in human history, nears. For God's people, it will be a time for unity.
It goes on to say, during the coming time of trouble for this system, we will have to be truly united.
So let me ask you, do you think it's any coincidence that here where we are in the stream of time that we see Jehovah pulling his organization closer and closer together in unity?
Is it any coincidence that we hear over and over again the need for peace and for unity? No. You see, is this world gets more and more divided, fragmented, fighting?
We need to pull tighter and tighter together in unity. And that requires that all of us work on these beautiful qualities of humility, mildness, and patience.
And when there's a lack of unity, what do we have to do? Well, we have to look at ourselves. You see, generally, we find that the problem is me. It's us.
Maybe we weren't consulted as soon as we should have been. Or maybe the our idea of how the work or this thing should be done wasn't shared by others. But in the grand scheme of things, does it really make a difference?
And many times when we look at a situation afterwards and we pull back unemotionally, we generally find that, well, maybe our idea was pretty good, but the timing wasn't good.
Or maybe it wasn't that great of an idea after all. Or maybe there was more than one way for this thing to be handled. Or perhaps Jehovah's spirit was leading things in a different direction.
Well, again, what can help us to not be an obstacle to unity, humility, mildness, patience? Just what we're considering in Ephesians chapter 4.
You see, we have to have the confidence that if it's important to Jehovah, it'll happen. And if not, what a shame it would be if we become an obstacle to unity over something that's not that important to Jehovah.
You see, brothers and sisters, we need the Gideons to help us in our support of the governing body.
Gideon was such a beautiful example. Once he understood Jehovah's direction, he was willing to run into the fire for Jehovah and for his organization.
That's what we need. We need Gideons. We don't need any more Ephremites.
So in harmony with today's text, may each one of us walk worthily in these last days, work on the qualities of humility, mildness, and patience.
And if we do, we will be a uniting force for good and of Gideon-like value to Jehovah and the organization in the troublesome days ahead.
When we're humble and add to the peace of the congregation, we make Jehovah happy.
As Jehovah's Witnesses, we cherish our privilege to share the good news with others.
What can help us be adaptable in our ministry?
Please enjoy the latest installment of Iron Shopping's Iron.
Hi, I am Michalis, and this is Iron Shopping's Iron.
One challenge that often makes me nervous is when I've prepared an introduction, I've planned the conversation, but the householder doesn't follow the plan, and I have to adapt.
Have you ever had that experience? This could mean that what we prepared just won't work.
So we're going to discuss four tips that have helped me, and hopefully will help you be more adaptable.
The four tips are, one, know your territory, two, make use of the teaching toolbox, three, anticipate common objections or questions, and four,
be flexible, adjust to the householder's needs.
Because remember, this is meant to be a conversation, not a sermon, or a sales pitch.
Now, let's look at a situation where applying these four suggestions can help.
So, what introduction are you using?
I thought I would talk about economic problems.
Hmm, good idea, and it really suits the territory.
Thanks.
I'll read Isaiah 65-21-23, and then offer the kingdom tract.
Perfect. I'll get the scripture ready.
Excellent.
Good morning.
Many people in our area struggle to make ends meet.
Do you think there will ever be a time when we won't have to stress about money?
Actually, now isn't a good time. I just received some bad news.
I'm sorry.
We'll come back another time then.
Thank you.
Okay. Our sister applied our first two tips really well.
But our sisters are usually excellent when it comes to the ministry.
So, no real surprises there.
Did you notice?
First, she knew her territory well and had a presentation designed specifically for it.
Second, her scripture and talking point were taken from the tract
what is the kingdom of God?
Which, as you know, is part of our teaching toolbox.
However, when the householder had something else on her mind,
our sister opted to return later.
That could be a good decision in this kind of situation.
But let's see what would happen if she were to ask just one more question
and adapt according to the householder's response.
Actually, now isn't a good time.
I just received some bad news.
I'm sorry. Is there anything we can do to help?
No.
I just heard my sister's cancer.
Oh, that must be so difficult for your sister and for you.
Yes, when someone we love is suffering we can often feel helpless.
That's exactly how I feel.
If you have a moment, could I show you something that I find comforting
about a time in the near future when I loved ones will never suffer again?
Hmm, I'd like that.
Notice what the Bible says at Revelation 21, verses 3 and 4.
With that, I heard a loud voice from the Throne saying,
Wow. Did you see how she was able to offer this woman real comfort
just by being adaptable?
All it took was one simple question.
Is there anything we can do to help?
She was sincere and friendly and the householder responded.
At that point, our sister applied our third tip.
She obviously was familiar with some common anxieties of ones in that territory
because she smoothly transitioned to the topic of suffering
which allowed her to listen to the householders' real concern
and then implement our fourth tip.
She adjusted to meet those needs.
Plus, she didn't struggle to find information to use.
She stayed right there in her teaching toolbox.
Granted, not every situation will be as straightforward as this.
And it takes time and experience to get comfortable moving from one topic to another.
But if we apply our four tips,
know your territory.
Make use of the teaching toolbox.
Try to anticipate common objections or questions
and then adjust to the householder's needs.
By applying these, we'll find very quickly that we're having meaningful conversations
and are able to share targeted truths with those most in need.
As always, these are just a few techniques that have worked for me
and I hope they work for you.
Remember, part of the beauty of our ministry
is that we continue to sharpen one another.
What good suggestions?
In this example, the sister was able to start a conversation with a simple, good morning.
Of course, in real life, the way you greet people in your territory
might be different than what we saw in the video.
We hope you've enjoyed this month's theme, Make Wise Decisions.
Before we conclude, we'd like to introduce you to our brothers and sisters
living on a land rich in Bible history.
Greece.
Greece is a mountainous country located at the southernmost part of the Balkan Peninsula
with a rugged and diverse landscape.
It also includes more than 2,000 islands.
And with one of the longest coastlines in all of Europe,
this is a land of beautiful beaches and sheltered coves.
Greece is known for its classic Mediterranean cuisine and delicacies
like Musica, made from eggplant and Domadakia,
stuffed grape leaves, usually filled with rice and herbs.
A less familiar part of Greek diet is mass Tiahil,
or Mastic Gum, which is made from the sap of a tree grown only on the small island of Heos.
In ancient times, people chewed Mastic to freshen their breath.
It was an early version of chewing gum.
Today, it's typically used to flavor everything from bread to ice cream.
The preaching of the good news in Greece goes all the way back to the first century
when the Apostle Paul first stepped over into Macedonia.
He landed in the seaport town of Neapoli,
known today as the city of Cavala.
And the preaching in Cavala is still going strong
with four congregations busy with public witnessing throughout the city,
including at the harbor and at rest areas.
Cavala's old city is built on a hill
where brothers and sisters often climb many steep steps
to reach the homes in their territory.
The branch office in Greece oversees the activity of more than 30,000 publishers,
including 2,900 on the neighboring island Nation of Cyprus.
They preach to a population of about 11 million people,
often in some of the very same cities where Paul preached in the first century,
including Thessalonica or modern-day Thessaloniki,
Berea or Berea and the capital city of Athens.
We'll end our visit to Greece back in Macedonia,
where our Greek brothers and sisters send their warmest greetings
from the assembly hall in Thessaloniki.
From the World Headquarters of Jehovah's Witnesses,
this is JW Broadcasting.